N1501=03-0084

INFORMATION FOR MARCH-APRIL 2004
WG21/WG14 MEETINGS IN SYDNEY, NSW
AUSTRALIA

P.J. Plauger
Dinkumware, Ltd.
pjp@dinkumware.com


The meetings will actually be held in the town of Coogee
(pronounced like `could she' after three cans of Fosters).
It is a seaside resort town in the southeastern suburbs
of Sydney. Tana and I lived there for a month when we
first moved to Australia in 1991. I can report that it
has a fine beach, a funky atmosphere, and easy access
to downtown Sydney, the airport, etc. The locals almost
speak English, so you can probably get by with a phrase
book such as "How to Speak 'Strine."

Here is the information provided by Catherine Hickie of
Whitesmiths Australia Pty. Ltd., who will be hosting both
meetings.

P.J. Plauger

--------

The 2004 C/C++ standards meetings will be held at the Crowne Plaza Coogee
Beach in Sydney, Australia and will be hosted by Whitesmiths Australia.
The dates are:

	WG21/C++ 21-26 March

	WG14/C   29 March - 2 April

If you book early enough the special "Whitesmiths" conference
rate of $AUD 205.00 (approx. $USD 130.00) per room per night will apply.
All rooms have ocean views. The rate also applies for pre and post
conference accommodation, is inclusive of tax, and is for single, twin, or
double occupancy.  Breakfast is an additional $AUD 15.00 per person per
day. Please book early -- preferably before end of December 2003.

Crowne Plaza Coogee Beach Sydney is directly opposite Coogee Beach with
panoramic views of the Pacific Ocean. Coogee is just six kilometres from
Sydney Airport and eight kilometres to Sydney Central Business District.

To make a reservation please contact the hotel directly by email at
reservations@crowneplazacoogee.com.au, or by telephone at +61 2 9315 7600. 
Be sure to ask for the "Whitesmiths" rate. To secure the booking you
will need to provide a credit card number.

For more information on this venue and surrounds please access their
website at: http://www.coogeebeach.sydney.crowneplaza.com/

Transfers to the Hotel:

Transfers from the airport and the city centre are by taxi, bus. and
charter limousine service.

Bus Services:

	'Eastern Suburbs Shuttle' from airport to Coogee Beach.

	'Bondi Explorer' bus from Coogee Beach to city and eastern suburbs.

	Bus 372 from Coogee Beach to Central Railway Station.

	Bus 373 from Coogee Beach to Circular Quay.

Distances to/from the Hotel:

	Kingsford Smith Airport (SYD): 6 kilometres - 20 minutes drive NE

	CBD: 7 kilometres -  25 minutes drive

	Railway Station : 4 kilometres - 20 minutes drive

	Beach - one minute walking

	Shops: 0.5 kilometres - two minutes walking

	Sydney City Centre: 7 kilometres

	Prince of Wales Hospital: 2.8 kilometres

	Randwick Racecourse: 3 kilometres

	Sydney Showground: 4.8 kilometres

	Centennial Park: 3 kilometres

	Sydney Cricket Ground: 5 kilometres

	University of NSW: 3.5 kilometres

	Historic La Perouse: 6 kilometres

	Nine golf courses within 5 kilometres
