Doc No:   ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG21/N1340
            J16 01-0049
Date:     November 6, 2001
Project:  JTC1.22.32
Ref. Doc:
Reply To: Thomas Plum
            Convener, SC22/WG21
            Plum Hall Inc
            3 Waihona Box 44610
            Kamuela HI 96743
            email: standards@plumhall.com
            Tel: +1-808-882-1255
            fax: +1-808-882-1556

WG21 and J16 (C++) Joint Mailing and Meeting Information
========================================================

1.   Mailings

Pre- and post-meeting documents are made available in machine-readable
form to all J16 and WG21 members. A list of internet sites is
available from the J16 Vice Chairman (see section 4, Contacts) and is
frequently broadcast over the committee's email reflector. All
documents, including the working drafts of the standard, are made
available machine-readable format, specifically in PostScript,
Adobe Acrobat, plain-text, and HTML formats.

Paper copies of the documents can be optionally sent to any J16 or
WG21 members in the US and abroad by ITI, which charges those members
an annual fee for this service. Contact the J16 Chairman for details.
There is currently no process for getting copies of just the documents
not available electronically.

1.1  Mailing Dates

1.1.1  Pre-Meeting Documents Deadline

The deadline for providing to the J16 Vice Chair all documents for the
pre-meeting collection is six weeks minus one day prior to the meeting
(i.e., the Tuesday, 41 days prior to Monday of the meeting week).

The mailing itself will be postmarked at least three weeks before the
meeting date. By agreement, this will satisfy the J16 "two week rule"
for giving members adequate time to consider issues before the meeting.

1.1.2  Post-Meeting Documents Deadlines

Post-meeting documents must be submitted within fourteen days of the
close of the meeting. This satisfies the NCITS requirement to
distribute minutes within two weeks, and helps satisfy the ISO/IEC JTC1
requirement to provide meeting agenda and meeting announcement
information two to three months in advance.



2.   Meetings

WG21 and J16 members interested in sponsoring meetings should contact
the WG21 Convener.  (See section 4, Contacts.)

2.1  Meeting Dates

Meetings are scheduled in the months of April
and October. WG21 meets alone Sunday
evenings. Co-located WG21 and J16 meetings run Monday through Friday.
(Calendar or logistics problems sometimes dictate adjustments to
these general rules; in the notes below "Sunday", "Monday" and "Friday"
refer to relative days of the meeting, not fixed days of the week.)

2.2  Meeting Sponsors and Locations

WG21 meetings should have ISO/IEC JTC1 national body sponsors such as ANSI
(US), BSI (UK), DIN (Germany), etc. J16 meetings require committee
member sponsors such as ATT, Compaq, etc. Hence, co-located meetings
should have two sponsors for each meeting.

The selection of meeting sponsors and locations reflects:

- The need to meet outside the United States, and preferably outside North
America, annually.

- The need to vary the geographic location of meetings so as to
encourage widest participation.

- The attempt to arrange meetings respecting the order in which sponsors
have volunteered.

2.3  Meeting Costs

Based on recent meetings, the cost for hosting a meeting ranges from
$6,000 to $10,000, with the higher cost including an (optional)
reception or other entertainment. A significant portion of the cost is
photocopying documents during the meeting. Recognizing that these costs
could be prohibitive, we recommend that one or more sponsors join to
share the meeting cost. An example of this is the Santa Cruz meeting in
October 1998, when Perennial, SGI, and Plum Hall
shared the costs.  The rules of ISO, as well as some national bodies,
do not permit the imposition of a mandatory facilities charge upon
attendees.  Naturally, the hotel can impose guest-room rates upon each
guest, and reasonable charges can be made for meals, but neither can be
made mandatory for day-attendees.

2.4  Meeting Invitation Letter

The usual process for WG21 meetings begins with a formal invitation from the
sponsoring national member body. Using the example of J16
corporate members, the sponsoring company sends an invitation letter to
the ITI Secretariat. If the invitation letter demonstrates that adequate
support is provided for the meeting, then the invitation letter is
forwarded to ANSI for issuance to the SC22 Secretariat and the WG21
convener. Adequate support includes indication of how clerical, copying,
and refreshment needs will be met, in addition to the information
provided in the meeting information package.
Given the possibility of many delays, it is advisable to send copies of
the invitation letter and its attachments to the SC22 Secretariat
(Matt Deane) and the WG21 convener. If meeting sponsors need
assistance, the J16 International Representative and the WG21 Convener
may be consulted.

2.5  Meeting Information Distribution

Meeting sponsors must distribute the meeting information package such
that it is a available for discussion at the meeting prior to the one
they are sponsoring. For example, the package describing the April 2000
meeting must be available at the October 1999 meeting.

The meeting information package should accompany the national member
body meeting invitation letter. The invitation letter must be sent
approximately 5 to 6 months in advance of the sponsored meeting. This
allows the letter to progress through the national member body
(standards organization, e.g., ANSI) where it is eventually sent to the
WG21 Convener in time to announce the meeting 3 to 4 months in advance
as required by ISO/IEC JTC1 rules.

2.6  Meeting Support Requirements

2.6.1  Meeting Information Package

Meeting sponsors must prepare a meeting information package which:

- identifies the nearest major airport and its distance to the meeting
facility

- identifies the lodging facility or facilities and their distance to
the meeting facility

- identifies available ground transportation for getting from the
airport to the lodging and meeting facility; this could include comments
on price and relative convenience of train, taxi, subway, and bus
transport.

- provides the address, telephone numbers and facsimile numbers for use
in locating the hotel and meeting locations and to make reservations as
necessary.

Information on local attractions is optional but appreciated.

If the sponsor desires, it is acceptable to host the meeting in
corporate, academic or standards institution facilities rather than a
hotel. Transportation arrangements for the day and evening meetings
would be required. Using non-hotel facilities has the advantage that
sponsors need not be locked into binding arrangements with hotels and
attendees may feel free to stay in the hotel of their choice. On the
other hand, having the entire committee at the same location fosters
off-hours communication.  However, if using a corporate location,
the sponsor must be sure that security arrangements will be
acceptable to all the attendees.  The following arrangements have
usually been acceptable: signing-in, signing-out, wearing a
"guest" badge, even wearing an "escort required" badge.  Examples of
unacceptable arrangements would include non-disclosure agreements,
national-security requirements, country-of-origin requirements, etc.


2.6.2  Lodging Arrangements

Attendees of North American meetings like to pay less than $100
per room per night.  Recent experience seemed to indicate a threshold
around $130.  The conference hotel in Lund charged about $170 per
room per night so about half the attendees stayed elsewhere.  Recent
experience matched those numbers fairly closely.  A designated conference
hotel or list of hotels is acceptable.

2.6.3  WG21-Only Meeting Room

WG21 meetings are on Sunday evening prior to the week of co-located WG21
and J16 meetings. They usually begin at 1800 and last about two hours. A
room accommodating about 25-30 people is required.

2.6.4  Plenary Meeting Room

WG21 and J16 meet Monday through Friday in joint session.  Sometimes the
daily schedule is 0830-1730, sometimes it is 0800-1730.  Usually the
Monday session starts 30 minutes later to a small jet-lag adjustment.
Often technical sessions are scheduled in the
evening, 1900-2200. A single room with a computer projector
is needed, and microphones for the speaker at the projector, the joint
meeting chair, and for each 6-8 committee members. Most of the members
bring portable computers, so outlets for each attendee are necessary.
Attendance has been 40-70 people.  The usual meeting setup has been the
"hollow square" with all participants around the edges.  An alternative
for smaller rooms has been two long rectangular tables with participants
along each side (a "beer hall" setup); the smaller setup has sometimes
obviated the need for participant microphones.  It is considered
mandatory to provide each participant with at least four square feet
(one-half square meter?) of table space for laptop computers, notes,
documents, etc.  Ethernet connectivity within the meeting room allows
immediate distribution of working documents and has greatly reduced the
need for photocopying.  Internet connectivity allows access to external
ISO web sites (even if it also diverts attendees' attention).  Sometimes
the external internet connection consisted only of one telephone line;
on other occasions very fat pipes were made available.  Internet
access is not an absolute requirement (at least not yet, as of 2001).


2.6.5  Break-out Rooms

Subcommittees meet in parallel sessions Monday afternoon through
Thursday. 3-4 rooms for subcommittees should be available; two groups
can meet in the plenary session room if absolutely necessary.

2.6.6  Computer Support

Access to a laser printer is necessary throughout the week to prepare
documents. This permits documents to be prepared during the meeting.
The printer room may be the same as one of the
break-out rooms, if space permits both functions.


2.6.7  Copier Support

Copier service is necessary throughout the week. One-day turnaround is
preferred on documents that are collected at lunch and the evening
break. This service is normally paid for by the host, and cannot be
imposed as a fee upon attendees.

2.6.8  Refreshment Services

Lunch service is not necessary, but advice on where to eat is welcome.
Morning coffee, tea, and pastries (bagels, danish, muffins, etc) are
expected to be provided one-half hour prior to morning start time.
(If most attendees are staying in the meeting hotel, and if the hotel
provides the coffee-and-pastry service to all the guests, then the
host need not provide redundant service in the meeting room.)
Refreshment breaks at 1000 and 1500 are fairly standard and appreciated:
coffee and tea at the morning break; coffee, tea, soft drinks, cookies
etc at the afternoon break.

2.6.9  Evening Reception or Entertainment

Some meeting sponsors host an evening reception. This is purely
optional. To contain costs, other companies might be involved in the
planning and funding of a reception. Some members travel with families,
especially for the outside-USA meetings, so please indicate if
families are welcome at the reception.

The best evening for the reception is Thursday; the worst is probably
Wednesday, since that evening is used to draft formal motions.
Technical sessions are often held Monday or Tuesday.


3.   Contacts

J16 Chairman:   Steve Clamage <Stephen.Clamage@sun.com>

J16 Vice chair: Clark Nelson <clark.nelson@intel.com>

J16 International Rep: Clark Nelson <clark.nelson@intel.com>

ITI Secretariat:   Kate McMillan <kmcmillan@itic.nw.dc.us>

WG21 Convener:    Tom Plum <tplum@plumhall.com>

SC22 Secretariat: Matt Deane <mdeane@ANSI.org>


5.   Acknowledgments -- Previous Meetings and Corporate Sponsors

Meeting       Location                Corporate Sponsor
------------- ---------------------- ------------------------------
Dec 89        Washington, DC          Hewlett-Packard
Mar 90        Somerset, NJ            ATT
Jul 90        Seattle, WA             Microsoft
Nov 90        Palo Alto, CA           HP
Mar 91        Nashua, NH              DEC
Jun 91        Lund, Sweden            Lund Inst.
Nov 91        Dallas, TX              Texas Instruments
Mar 92        London, United Kingdom  Symantec
Jul 92        Toronto, Canada         IBM
Nov 92        Boston, MA              OSF
Mar 93        Portland, OR            Sequent, Tektronix, Mentor Graphics
Jul 93        Munich, Germany         Siemens Nixdorf
Nov 93        San Jose, CA            Taligent
Mar 94        San Diego, CA           ATT/NCR
Jul 94        Waterloo, Canada        Watcom
Nov 94        Valley Forge, PA        Unisys
Mar 95        Austin, TX              Motorola
Jul 95        Monterey, CA            Sun Microsystems
Nov 95        Tokyo, Japan            IBM
Mar 96        Santa Cruz, CA          Borland
Jul 96        Stockholm, Sweden       Ericsson
Nov 96        Kona, HI                Plum Hall
Mar 97        Nashua, NH              Digital
Jul 97        London, England, UK     Programming Research
Nov 97        Morristown, NJ          AT&T
Mar 98        Nice, France            ILOG
Oct 98        Santa Cruz, CA          Silicon Graphics, Plum Hall, Perennial
Apr 99        Dublin, Ireland         Martin O'Riordan
Oct 99        Kona, HI                Plum Hall
Apr 00        Tokyo, Japan            ITSCJ
Oct 00        Toronto, Canada         IBM, Eastman-Kodak, Peer Direct
Apr 01        Copenhagen, Denmark     DS
Oct 01        Redmond, WA             Microsoft
